---
title: On Inadequacy
author: Josh Taylor
date: 2018-05-02
---

> Every Failure is a Lesson, a chance to grow.

This is what I tell myself whenever things don't work out. I have to do it
firmly, with conviction, almost shout it at myself. The idea behind it is
likely felt by every person at some point—trying to find a silver lining around
a mushroom cloud. It sounds stoic, self-aware and the mark of a person with
that unconscious strength to deal with anything. I can't feel this strength. I
never have done. Nearly every victory I've had has been hollow and every
failure crippling—extending to every action, test and relationship.

"Woe is me", right? 

Joking aside it was a big shock when this realisation came to me. Reading
[therapy profiles][] of cases with deep inadequacy issues, I felt a growing
sense of everything suddenly making sense. Like why have I felt uneasy if I
haven't been regularly messaging somebody else? This particular one goes back
all the way to the days of MSN, when 'nudges' were a thing, where I learned the
ability to be immensely distracted and fulfilled by absorbing myself into the
problems of others.  It made me feel like I was helping, like I was there for
somebody. Conversely when I couldn't help I had an emotional over-reaction.
This still happens today. I also still isolate myself from certain social and
romantic situations where I'm not confident. I also still try to take control
of other people when I feel especially low-grade. I also still can't fight a
strong perception of failure after I've failed once. I have even [blogged about
all this before][] without even realising it.

When looking forward to going out into the post-education real world, this will
affect me professionally as well as personally. Every person who can work out
that 'self-assured, slightly over-estimating' personality, which company
recruiters love these days, will have an edge on me [^1]. Not to sound like an
anti-resume, but I've already demonstrated in my previous employments an
ability to inflate estimations, doubt my judgement and resent co-workers for
not giving me guidance which I didn't ask for. I can trace all of these traits
either directly or indirectly back to a feeling of not being enough.

Lots of my actions in daily life can be traced back to inadequacy this way.
Like reading books with long words in them to become more intellectual, without
feeling like I connect with what is written. I try to cultivate the lifestyle
of somebody highly functional, with little real reasoning for the lifestyle
changes in the first place. I've found many friends who I like for different
reasons, but I get intimately attached to those who make me feel empowered
either through encouragement and attitude or through asking me for help.
Whatever can be spun from these behaviours, they're definitely weird. 

So what's there for it? [Back to therapy?][] I think so. This feeling has held
me back for so long and has dragged me down so often. It's time to stamp it
out. [Every failure will become a lesson][], a chance to grow.


[therapy profiles]: https://www.goodtherapy.org/learn-about-therapy/issues/inadequacy

[blogged about all this before]: /posts/orange-lit-runs.html

[Back to therapy?]: /posts/soap-operas.html

[Every failure will become a lesson]: https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/40745.Mindset

[^1]: Ironically this is a feeling of inadequacy about feeling inadequate.
