---
title: Kebab Shop
date: 2015-12-02
author: Josh Taylor
---

Last week I went to a kebab shop, the week before I went to a kebab shop, the
week before that I'm not sure; don't usually keep track that much. Not sure if
I'll go to one this week. Depends how drunk I get—it usually requires a fair
amount of beer/rum/wine/ in order to convince myself that it's a good idea. The
guy at Haworth pizza just down the road seems to recognise me by face value
these days. He always seems in such a neutral mood, only caring about orders
and making good business which can be fully appreciated. People are always
talking about the "Haworth pizza guy". Short, Bald, mid thirties, a sharp look
in his eye and always addresses you as "my friend". I've even received selfies
of people posing behind the Haworth desk with this guy, he's a local celebrity
around students.

Some interesting characters always roll into Kebab shops. Never your crazy
sports types or renegade christians; the occasional well-adjusted person shows
up but the majority of the crowd are in thick water-proofs reeking of
desperation or are in buttoned up shirts and short dresses stinking of Malibu.
Never met anybody new in a Kebab shop. In fact, despite 50% of the customers
being drunk as hell, people have a quiet reserve about them. People know their
business and their business is salty greasy food glory. Conversation can get
between them and their goal so it is avoided at all costs.

Have come to accept that with every visit I am dying a little faster, and my
body reminds me of this by making me feel like absolute garbage the next day.
It doesn't matter what's ordered it always has the same bloated, destroying
effect. Why go? Not really even that sure myself. It always seems to become a
good idea at some point—hen about half way through eating, when I have
thought a little more, I regain the ability to see the error in my ways. I
wonder if the staff even consider eating their own food, does Mr Haworth even
like Doner kebabs?

Deep insanity is a much more common theme amongst the customers than any other
type of place I've been to. Once I was in there and a guy could barely speak
his order due to intense shivering—wasn't really cold that night so I expect
he was on some kind of local street brew of chemicals. Didn't look at all fun
for him, but all of his clothes were from Abercrombie and Fitch so I can't
imagine he had any problems in real life. Another customer completely hid his
face only allowing a paper thin slit for his eyes to poke through, he kept on
curling up his hands as well and scratching the seat next to me. Almost like he
was clawing for insects that weren't there, his hands were vainy and showed
signs of gnaws. As soon as I realised I was staring at a random guy's hand he
quickly stood up, grabbed his order (which by the sound of Mr Haworth was a
large Chicken doner), and fled the scene disappearing down the street.

No walk is longer than the walk from the shop back to your place. It seems like
the time to walk down every road is increased by 4x. Einstein forgot that part
of Special relativity, the dilation of time due to takeaway. My friend Luke
experienced such frustration with this once that he sprinted back with his
Pizza, trying to escape the long wait.

Once it is all done with and the polystyrene is sitting in the bin; the guilt
and bloating is just setting in; I'm sitting down trying to work out why lisp
is supposed to blow my mind; the steady chanting of people coming out of Asylum
is starting; the constant dings of group chats from my phone are driving me
insane; that Hunter S Thompson book that's taken me 4 months to get half way is
staring at me again; my computer monitors are once again giving my brain
sunburn.
