---
title: Soap Operas
date: 2017-06-15
author: Josh Taylor
---

My original impression of therapy probably came from daytime-TV soap operas;
those terribly written bits of petty drama that are designed to fill in
excessive silences on the weekends. After going through some rough times,
somebody would lie down on a brown sofa and talk to a man with a small pair of
glasses on the end of his nose. 
	
> "What is the matter?" 
	
The character would talk and talk until they came to some realisation and all
their problems were fixed. They would shake hands, leave, and the show would
carry on as normal. This is what I thought therapy was for a long time. If I'd
ever said this to anybody they would've laughed and said I'd gotten the wrong
idea but I never did, so I kept on thinking like this into adulthood. Kept on
thinking that therapy was for people who knew what their problems were, that
knew what to say when they lay on that sofa. Somebody less stable and less able
to work out how they were thinking or who often got confused by their actions
was headed for a mental hospital.
	
Thinking like that did me no good when I needed to fix my own emotional
problems and behaviours. When I have a personal crisis it's difficult to work
out what's wrong, so when I try to talk it through with anybody it becomes hard
to really talk about my issues. This always discouraged me away from
councillors or therapists because it felt like they would end up doing most of
the talking while I would struggle to talk to them at all. I would be pushed
out the door, labelled "OK" as soon as possible. Nothing would be fixed.		
	
Yet as I grew up I needed to talk to more people Every bad feeling became a
weight on everyday life. I could talk to friends, but it always felt like I was
too much of a burden. They could tolerate it for a while but it was easy to see
that the constant drama from Josh quickly exhausted them---so after a while it
felt sensible to find somebody professional who I could regularly talk to.
Reading philosophy also changed my opinion on therapy. When  Epicurus' wrote
about his Utopian commune he envisioned everybody working together and helping
each other in a cooperative movement and he said how the therapist would play a
big role in the happiness of that society. It made me consider that therapy
isn’t just for the weird, perhaps it’s a normal thing that everybody needs but
gets in different ways. Like through friends, culture, hobbies or a
professional.		

I immediately signed up for some private therapy sessions. People often find
this move quite surprising. The "Let's Talk" NHS service in Hull is usually
where people are directed to when mental health issues arrive. However, the
waiting times for the service have shot up in recent years; typically 4 weeks
pass from the first phone call to sitting down in front of somebody to help
you. It’s great to have for free but in most mental health circumstances, for
example if you're experiencing chronic anxiety, it can be very hard to carry on
living without help for that long. I think many can understand the need for
care to be immediate. Another thing that deterred me away from the NHS was that
(with a constrained budget and a long waiting list of patients) the incentive
would probably be to get me discharged from the service as quickly as possible,
perhaps prematurely. I also worried that, after waiting 4+ weeks, I wouldn’t
get on or feel comfortable with the therapist allocated to me. I wanted the
flexibility to switch persons if I needed to.
		
So I went for it. My first therapy session. I landed myself on a chair, sitting
up and never lying down, and found out what modern therapy was like. I
immediately discovered that my soap opera view of therapy was as shallow and
unrealistic as the soap operas themselves. The old techniques I expected
weren't what I got. Psychoanalysis, the therapy technique where you try to find
the root of all your issues by talking about your past, was outmoded and un
helpful in most circumstances. Cognitive behavioural therapy and transaction
analysis took its place, where the therapist teaches the patient better
understanding of how their thoughts and feeling interact. It sounds stupid, but
even fixing strange physical behaviours made a world of difference to my mental
health. Learning how to breathe properly and deeply from the diaphragm helped
me out of so many potential anxiety attacks.		
	
After around 8 sessions it feels like my entire life has improved in so many
little ways. The strongest feeling I get after therapy is ambition, a firm
sense that I can become who I want to be and do what I want to do. Along with
that I have more confidence with relationships and dealing with emotional
strain, around life and less existential dread. But the best part of the entire
process is how normal it feels to visit a therapist, how well it fits into my
life and how much of a release it can be.		
	
For all the people I've ever known with slipping mental health, therapy will be
your godsend. It's expensive if done privately, but ever since the first
session I've consistently felt like it's the best money I've ever spent. I feel
happier, thinking about life in new ways and looking forward positively to the
future. My advice to any readers thinking whether they themselves want to seek
out therapy is that you shouldn't worry if you feel like your problem isn't
serious enough. Any mental problem or intrusive thinking is stopping you from
being the person you really want to be. Tend to your mental health, visit a
therapist, learn about yourself.
