---
title: Profoundly Immoral and Wicked
date: 2016-02-18 
author: Josh Taylor
---

I had never once considered what it meant to be 'evil' until very recently. It
wasn't something I ever considered to be debatable; good was good, evil was
evil. Watching enough Tarantino films brought the possibility that everybody
was evil in some way, but they never caused me to ask "what makes them evil?"

## Knowing you're doing wrong

Let's assume that good or evil is defined by your actions, ignore good/evil
aspects of thought for the time being. The line that must be drawn first is one
between those who cause pain but do not realise it and those who realise they
are causing damage but continue anyway. Ignorant causers of pain can not be
labelled as evil, as far as I believe; it is the intent of causing damage which
defines somebody as being evil.

Consider a fireplace in a campsite. The fire can burn those around it, but it
seems illogical to point at the fire and shout "evil!" It is just a natural
thing. Now consider a person or other animal picked up a stick set alight by
the fire, dropping the stick in range of one of the tents. Could this be a
concrete example of evil? Not really, the carrier of the stick may have no
intent of burning the campsite. The intent of the carrier is what separates the
evil action from the act of ignorance.

## Causing harm without having an end

There are many examples in history however where causing pain with intent has
been viewed as "good" by many people. Wars, genocide, prisoner torture: all
seen as "necessary" actions at some point or another, acts supposedly working
towards a common good. While all were causers of unimaginable pain and
suffering, both physically and mentally, it can be disturbingly easy to put
yourself in the position of the torturer and see yourself as just. What brings
that sense of Justice? The torturer can point to a reason why they are causing
the pain, a reason that will contribute more to the common good and redeems the
pain caused.

Regardless of the validity the torturer's reason has, can they really be pinned
down as being truly evil? That is questionable, but if the answer were no then
the only evil actions in the world would be those committed by a Sadist. Those
that cause pain without any reason but with intent. It's difficult to find
examples of these people since descriptions of their acts can always be spun to
have some kind of reason. A school yard bully comes to mind, not stealing money
or trying to gain social prestige, but just enjoying the act of humiliating
others. An act of rape could be another example, of a man not trying to satisfy
his personal urges, but enjoys more the shame he is inflicting on his victim.
This I find is the true essence of evil.

## Looking to Google

The top definition for evil on Google is 'profoundly immoral and wicked' [^1].
This suggests that evil is a very flexible term, that there is no true concrete
example of evil, since morality is itself flexible from person to person. A
democratic approach could be taken to define something as evil. If the majority
of people believe that a person's actions are completely immoral then they are
by definition evil. This seems to be a popular opinion of what evil is since it
doesn't excuse the actions of the immoral even if they intend to be moral,
however it is completely objective and the validity of the opinion is based on
how many people are on the accuser's side.

It can be thought that these days, in order to be evil, you need to be up
against a crowd of people sharpening their pitchforks. If no crowd ever appears
then you can't possibly be evil. People can believe this as their ignorant
actions harm the lives of countless others in small ways. An example of this
was pointed out in a very [excellent talk by Maciej
Ceg≈Çowski](http://idlewords.com/talks/what_happens_next_will_amaze_you.htm),
which is transcribed online. In the latter part of his talk he looks to silicon
valley, where money is thrown from venture to venture in an endless competition
for prestige. All the meanwhile the homeless population of San Francisco is
rising every year [^2]. While millions and potentially billions of dollars are
thrown on grand projects in the area such as space programs, human immortality
and smartphone apps; people are struggling to gather ten dollars while living
on the streets. In this modern world these projects may never be defined as
evil.  Who doesn't like space programs? As long as people do enjoy these grand
projects, the mob of pitchforks won't appear and the venture capitalists will
continue to operate, believing that their actions benefit mankind.

Even then, going back to my earlier definition of evil, they aren't sadists.
They don't want to cause pain and if pinned to the ground they would never say
that they don't care about homelessness. Are they just simply ignorant of how
much benefit they could give? Am I ignorant to the importance of their
projects?

## Personal Conflict

So are evil people sadistic, immoral or just ignorant? Or could they perhaps be
a combination of the three? Saying that people are only evil if they are
sadistic is too strict I find. This excuses about 80% of modern cases of evil
and still leaves that remaining 20% on questionable terms. Immorality is the
other extreme, it is too loosely defined and could be pinned on anybody in a
variety of situations. Ignorance with power and a weakness for personal gains
gives rise to what we currently see in silicon valley; but even as it pains
people can it really be evil?

It just gives rise to a big personal conflict, and makes me wonder if evil
exists at all? Could it not just be something planted in me as a child? Perhaps
all people that are seen as evil were just misguided in intricate ways. Perhaps
it isn't something worth thinking about too much.

[^1]: I find the use of the word "wicked" in this definition quite funny, since
the top Google definition for wicked is "evil or morally wrong". I thought
recursive definitions were only something that existed in code. The second
definition of evil I find is surprisingly "extremely unpleasant", like an
unpleasant sight or smell. I have never heard the word used in this way, "the
smell of that fish is quite evil" just sound bazaar.
		
[^2]: The San Francisco government has done a count on this, indeed the number
of surveyed people homeless has [risen in 2015](https://goo.gl/e6zQrV).
