---
title: Meditating on the Tube
subtitle: An Essay on London
date: 2022-09-23
location: Tottenham, London
---

<!-- Thesis: I find London tricky to live in because it demands a level of
stimulation that I find uncomfortable -->

![Street in London at night, significantly blurred. Showing street lights, a
road and building in the background.](/images/meditating-on-the-tube.png)\

After spending time in London, you will likely hear the phrase: "tired of
London, tired of life". The phrase dates back to Samuel Johnson, the author of
the first dictionary ever written who lived in London. Although I doubt we
should be taking life advice from a dictionary writer, which sounds like the
very definition of a tiring life, the phrase has struck a chord with many. Yet
the saying has always vexed me. While living here I have found many of my
experiences incredibly tiring and I don't believe it is because I have given up
on my life. It's just that London demands a level of stimulation that many find
uncomfortable, including me.

Let's take a very common experience shared by anyone who has lived in or
visited London: riding the tube. I have often imagined that if hell has a sound
it would be close to the screeching and roaring heard on the Jubilee line
between Green Park and Westminister. While riding on that stretch, I see each
person putting on a stoic expression as conversations are extinguished and ears
are plugged. This experience is common all over the tube network. Sudden sounds
can bleat at you through the endless hamster-cage tunnels. It's hardly pleasant
and causes my whole body to clench, like it needs to run away.

It was manageable to start with but it started to wear me down. I saw signs of
this in others too, where many sitting opposite would close their eyes or bury
themselves in games and music. I soon found myself joining them in trying to
cut myself off from the stimulating environment but it always left me feeling
anxious afterwards just the same. The only solace I was able to find on my
journeys was to meditate on the tube. I spent journeys totally concentrated on
my body. I observed in detail how I contracted and reacted in step with the
tube's hellish soundscape and erratic motion. Through this I could regain some
safe ground and expand my tolerance for it all. Unfortunately this is not the
only situation where tolerance needed to be built in London. It turns out that
everywhere is subtly like the tube. 

The people of London are unique in that they are so diverse yet all share a
common value of ecstasy. I mean 'ecstasy' here not as the drug enjoyed by
dopamine fiends everywhere. I mean it as the mental state marked by the moments
in our lives where a surreal level of happiness or enjoyment is reached. Think
of: a surprise party, seeing a favourite band, tasting a gourmet meal or being
applauded by a crowd. Of the many people I have met in London, those who loved
the city and seemed the fit in the most were all direct seekers of ecstasy.
They were serial planners with calendars filled to burst. Always building up to
a next big achievement while heading off to lengthy parties on the weekend.
'Work hard, play hard' was common, known less romantically as 'burning the
candle at both ends'. This shared value creates the buzz of the city. Some may
find it endearing and exciting; yet I only find it uncomfortable.

Whenever I hear somebody say 'tired of London, tired of life' I usually have a
fleeting moment of asking myself 'am I boring person?' Yet this is an absurd
conclusion. As we go through life, we each grow an idea of what a valuable life
looks like. There is no one right or essential answer to the question 'what is
a valuable life?' So just because my view of a valuable life is not aligned
with the normal London experience, it does not mean that I need to change or I
have poor taste. In fact it a helpful indicator that London is not a place
where I want to put down roots or commitments. Ironically it means that if I am
currently feeling tired of life, then I am probably tired of London.

