---
title: On Inevitable Exploitation 
subtitle: Being exploited is unavoidable unless we try something radically new 
date: 2023-07-05
location: London
---

![Man with hot drink, face down on a laptop](/images/employee.svg)\

Exploitation has been a persistent issue throughout human history, leaving a
lasting impact on societies. It raises the question: Is exploitation an
inherent part of civilisation? As we've progressed over time, has only the
focus of exploitation changed?

When we consider the origins of widespread exploitation like slavery or wage
labor, we may wonder with exasperation if there was a time before it existed.
Throughout history, societies have oppressed certain individuals or groups to
benefit others, although the methods and targets have varied.

In today's society, exploitation operates differently. Instead of relying on
force and punishment, modern systems like capitalism use incentives.
Capitalists and landowners hold the rewards, enticing people to work for
personal gain. This system allows for some social mobility, education, and
self-improvement.

Capitalism, despite its flaws, offers opportunities for change because people
are becoming more educated and aware. This opens up the possibility of
collectively managing our affairs, reducing the control exerted by the
capitalist class. Socialism challenges existing power structures by emphasising
social ownership and democratic control of resources. However the question
remains: Who would hold the rewards, and therefore the power, in a socialist
society?

The short answer is: we don't know yet, but some ideas exist. Socialism is
often seen as an alternative to capitalism, but it doesn't necessarily
represent a final solution. It is more like a transformative change aiming to
create a fairer society. The outcome of such transformations is uncertain, with
different visions and interpretations of socialism. So far, [state
socialism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/State_socialism) has been the only
observed outcome of successful socialist change. However, it is mostly viewed
very unfavourably in the West, as it has resulted in situations where all the
rewards and means of punishment end up benefiting a group of corrupt political
elites. Therefore, we should consider alternative approaches to state
socialism.

Various alternative models have been proposed to transform society while
addressing concerns of authoritarianism and power concentration. Examples
include [libertarian
socialism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Libertarian_socialism),
[anarcho-syndicalism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anarcho-syndicalism), and
decentralised or non-hierarchical systems that prioritise individual autonomy
and participation. Perhaps within these models lies the end of mass
exploitation as we know it.

Exploitation, in some form, has persisted throughout human history. However, as
civilisation has evolved, the dynamics of exploitation have shifted from
traditional slavery to subtler control mechanisms like capitalism.
Nevertheless, the potential for change remains, especially with movements like
socialism that challenge existing power structures. It's important to
understand that socialism is not a fixed end state, but rather a stepping stone
towards greater justice and equality. By exploring alternative approaches to
state socialism, we can enrich the discussion and pave the way for new
possibilities in shaping our collective future.

---

*This post was written while attending [Marxism Festival
2023](https://socialistworker.co.uk/marxismfestival/) in London, organised by
the [Socialist Workers
Party](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Socialist_Workers_Party_(UK)).*
