This segways well into an idea that slowly dawned on me while reading this
book: science is excellent, but man oh man is it boring! Like
I'd-rather-watch-a-fireplace-on-tv boring! So before you train your weapons on
me, I specifically mean 'science' as in the activities and methods of science.
The results of science are incredible, have brought so many benefits to
humanity and can be made into very engaging entertainment. However I have never
seen a news broadcast that compares meta-analyses or dives into statistical
probabilities of truth or talks about statistical significance. Why? Because
it's boring! Where is the drama? Where is the story? I believe this is a major
issue that will always plague science and will reduce trust in scientific
institutions as a source of truth.

Okay, so what's the big deal if science is boring? Well if something is boring,
it means that it is harder to engage with. In more communitarian societies,
where trust is present between members of society and its institutions, science
being boring wouldn't be a problem because the activities of science could be
delegated to specialists and people would trust their judgements. However in
more individualist cultures, people tend to favour their own judgements over
those of others and so would not trust scientific institutions. The difficulty
of people to engage with science on their own would then make it less probable
for their judgements to use any kind of scientific activities. In an
individualistic society, if a person cannot engage with a qualified judgement
then they will reject it.

The problem may not also just be with engagement. Even if a person overcomes
themselves and willingly puts in the time to wade through data and scientific
reasoning, it's a lot of work! Nobody has the resources to individually launch
a scientific enquiry about each of the decisions they need to make! At some
point, some other source of knowledge tends to be used. At best a qualified
authority or at worst a demagogue. It's often hard to tell the difference and
rarely does a source of knowledge sit neatly at one end of the spectrum. 
